---
layout: post
title:  "Book review - Fifth Head of Cerberus"
date:   2024-12-27 23:34:21 +0000
categories: jekyll update
---

Just finished Gene Wolfe's "Fifth Head of Cerberus", and I loved it. Let me get into the details.

Gene Wolfe, in case you haven't heard of him, was one of the greatest Sci-Fi authors. His magnum opus, for which most know him, is "Book of the New Sun", a veritable four-volume saga, set in this bleak, mysterious future. I haven't read that one yet, so I'll hold off on value judgements.

[put picture of him here]

I will say a couple things about Gene Wolfe. He knows how to introduce someone to a world he created, and he utterly refuses to do your homework.

See, too many authors go the bland route of having their characters go on long-winded monologues about how their world works, so you the reader can catch up. But if you take a step back, the way they do it is always a bit stilted, isn't it? They're *in* the world, why are they explaining it to... themselves? Have you ever had conversations such as "Hmm, hold up, let me use my iPhone, you know, that device that lets you talk to people at a distances?" "Ah yes, I often use mine to browse the Internet, that super-connected network of devices that lets you access all sorts of content from around the globe!"? 

Yeah, you haven't, and in a Gene Wolfe story, neither do the characters. They are simply living their very interesting lives - you are just watching, and can piece together their world if you read attentively and gather enough info, but blink and you miss it. Skimming these books is fatal - you will miss important details without even having noticed that happened. 

But Wolfe knows just how much or how little info to give the reader at any time. Too little and the reader gets confused and gives up - too much and it's an overwhelming info dump. Wolfe straddles the line just fine - at every point you get more info about the mystery boxes he has built, and the plot per se advances at a steady pace.

The mystery alone is worth recommending the book on, but just like the masterful game Outer Wilds (which I fully and wholeheartedly recommend!), speaking of it too much diminishes the effect it has on the reader - you're supposed to get the info I'd give you on your own, and piece it together yourself. So I'll speak of it sparingly, focusing on the vibes of each and how they impacted me.

Now on to the book itself - it is divided into three different novellas. I will go by each.

The first is the eponymous "Fifth Head of Cerberus". It deals with a narrator who is not-fully-reliable, Number Five, who is regaling you with the story of his life pre-incarceration, after being released. He tells of his origins, growing up with his brother David in his fathers'... burlesque establishment, with faithful tutor Mr. Million and the occasional friend dropping in. It's the most "standalone" of the three stories, if that makes sense - the other two enrich it a smidge, but don't really affect it all that much. It's also the most straightforward of it - while the other two take a bit more work to be understood, this one mostly reveals all its mysteries to the reader by the end. The characters are likable, there are some nice crunchy themes to be had. 9/10.

The second tells the story of two twin brothers, separated at birth. The younger brother is clearly on a coming-of-age spiritual journey of sorts. Any further info would spoil the story, oddly enough. Of the three, I preferred this one - it reveals the most background lore of the entire setting, and the tone is something else. It has this quasi-mystical fever-dream theme running through it. It enraptured me for all of the evening in which I read it, and I could not put the book down. It's told from an aboriginee perspective, and deals indirectly with drug use, the duality of identity, how two twins raised in completely different worlds can come to difer completely. If I had a complaint, it would be on how quick the story resolved, by the end, and how unclearly it does so. But it was worth the ride. 9.5/10.

The third is a puzzle-box in its own right. It tells the story of a long-time prisoner whose case is now suddenly being evaluated for a presumably final time. The story consists of the evaluating officer reading scattered bits and pieces of the documents recorded by the prisoner, which come either absurdly detailed and long, or feverish and short. It does an excellent job at portraying how someone's mental state deterioration can be clearly seen in their writing. The officer does not care for you, the reader - having clearly gone through this case multiple times, he sees the various writings in whichever order he cares for, and it's up to you to bring it all into a coherent (or is it?) narrative. However, this story is most dependent on the others - someone who isn't paying attention will not notice the many incongruencies that stand out, and will completely misunderstand what is really happening. I don't remember ever reading something else quite like this last story - I suppose it deals with how after patching together a bunch of narrative puzzle pieces, a greater narrative can arise. I do not know how to rate this however. I particularly loved it. ???/10.

And all of that makes up the book. The themes that undercut the whole thing seem to be, in no particular order - an unreliable narrator, a mystery in the background and the foreground that only comes together if you pay attention and bring together all the pieces, and and how someone's environment and upbringing can change how they view the world and write about it. The "real" narrative here, however, is hidden right below the surface, and would be worth a whole other story in its own right. I leave it up to you to find it.

Rating - 9/10

(So, the story is actually this - you'll have noticed that humans came to colonize Sainte-Anne, and it's neighbour, Sainte-Croix. In the first story, David and Number Five (whose real name is totally Gene Wolfe) discuss what happened to the abos, the aboriginee people who were on those planets before humanity came. One crackpot theory put forward by Aunt Jeannine, Gene's "aunt" (actually daughter) is that the abos were shapeshifters, who killed the settlers and then took their place. While this seems somewhat preposterous, it's more or less hinted by the other stories to be exactly the case.

In the second novella, it's straight up said by the Shadow Children that they are what remains of the humans that came to Sainte Anne. According to them, the shapeshifters (the abos) took their form, while they themselves became addicted to a hallucinogenic somewhat-poisonous plant and dwindled, becoming a very few bunch of cannibals, scavengers, and kinda-magical people who can spawn a mental construct (the Great Old One) with the echoes of their minds. In the story, Sandwalker befriends them after sharing a meal with them, and they proceed to help him throughout the book, and they ultimately save him in the climax - one of the last remaining Children, an actual child, determined not to die, reveals that the Shadow Children are all using their mystical powers to keep spaceships away from the planet, for not-entirely-explained reasons. At the end, the child chooses to stop doing that, and a bunch of ships immediately touch down on the planer, scaring the marshmen abos who have captured and are about to sacrifice Sandwalker and his family. This story is supposedly written by Dr. Marsch, the same anthropologist we meet in the previous story, who is interested in Veil's hypothesis.

The third story only makes sense when you consider the other two. It consists of a soldier analyzing the writings of an imprisoned Marsch. The soldier, who according to a cleverer writer is Number Five's brother, inspects the good doctor's writings to decide what to do with him. The story is told out of order, but given the dates it's somewhat easy to put it in order. It starts off easy enough - Marsch finds an old drunk who claims he's an abo (up for debate, but probably a fake, and the mother is the real deal), namely a descendant from Eastwind (from the former novella, who somehow got confused with Sandwalker at the end) and that his son is part abo. He volunteers his son to help Marsch go up to a sacred abo cave (likely the one mentioned in the second story, where Sandwalker's spiritual guru was). Marsch is surprised at the kid's prowess at just about everything (except using tools). They make great progress on their journey towards the cave, with Marsch, who is supposedly an adept marksman, killing just about every bit of wildlife on the way (except a cat, which joins them after the kid tames it). At one point, Marsch becomes certain that the boy is covertly seeing a girl, probably an abo. Then, the problems start. 

One day, the cat attacks Marsch for no seeming reason, wounding his hand, without which he supposedly can't shoot, and his handwriting worsens. Then, in a freak accident, the boy dies, after clumsily falling from a great height (which does not at all match what we've seen of him). Marsch, agitated by the death, buries him in a cavem which is what he thought the boy would want, along with the cat, and gives up on the expedition, returning to civilization. In short order, after visiting Dr. Veil (which happened in the first novella), he gets arrested for espionage. We, and the soldier reviewing the case, see writings he produced after imprisonment, in which he gets interrogated multiple times throughout his years of captivity. His interrogator believes his writings to be absolute rubbish, and that Marsch is a spy, come to help topple Saint-Croix's slavery-approving regime. By the end of his writings, exchanges with prisoners, worries over whether execution or release await him, and occasional cell transfers, Marsch decides to stop writing, to avoid giving his captors material with which to condemn him. This brings us to the end of the novella, where the soldier advises that they keep Marsch imprisoned until he becomes cooperative.

There's clearly a deeper mystery at play, and to anyone paying close attention, it becomes clear that there's somethings off - Marsch's writings at the start of the journey show that the man is a scatterbrained chatterbox - he keeps rambling and going off on tangents. He's also a great shot, using his rifle to slaughter the wildlife at many points in the story, while the boy sucks at using tools of any sort (which the abos are also known to be bad at). After his "cat attack", his handwriting seemingly deteriorates, as well as his aim. This also happens along the time where the boy supposedly dies, and yet, Marsch's writing more or less completely changes by then, becoming far less rambling, and more to the point, and similar to Sandwalker's POV. He straight up refers to Sainte-Anne as "sisterworld", which only the abos do. This paints a clear picture of what happened - the boy has clearly killed Marsch, probably after Marsch stumbled upon him and the girl, and then impersonated him, which is why his "Marsch's" handwriting and aiming skills suddenly take a dive. Whether Marsch was a spy or not is unclear, though there is tangential evidence that he was, but as the abo boy (identified as V.R.T btw) knew nothing of that, he is unable to tell the captors anything about that, leading to his current situation. 

The situation gets muddier when you put all stories together. In this first one, Gene Wolfe meets Marsch two times. This clearly happens after the kid has impersonated him. In any case, the second time, as he's in a hurry to kill his father, he gets Marsch to leave by saying he is clearly an abo (why he says this we are not sure, probably due to a weird pallor he has going on, along with his reluctance to leave for Earth). Gene's brother David is also aware of the abo theories, and probably instantly recognizes him as an abo, and decides to make use of his shapeshifting abilities as a spy for their own benefit - or maybe he has his own agenda. In any case, the story ends there.

Funny how even after piecing together the mystery, we still end up without the whole story. This is probably by design from Wolfe's part, to motivate the reader to make up his own ending to it, or to fill in the blanks however he wishes. Personally, I found the mystery compelling, the prose enriched to the point where a single sentence carries volumes of information and beauty, and the pacing utterly perfect. Each of the stories does its own thing, and does it quite well. Well done Gene Wolfe (the author). This is an underrated sci-fi classic for the ages.)